Title:  From isolation to cooperation: Iran at Davos
Until just a few years ago Iran was a country shunned at international meetings.
It topped former U.S. President Bush s list of rogue states . It was subjected to sanctions and ostracized by the international community. Due to its support to Hezbollah and similar entities, it was one of the first countries to come to mind at the mention of state sponsors of terror.
What happened then that Iranian President Rouhani was given the seat of honor at Davos? What has changed that the eyes that had once curiously sought the Turkish prime minister were looking at Rouhani?
 Consolidation of the regime
The Iranian leader expressed himself with the following words at Davos: No animosity lasts eternally, no friendship either lasts eternally .
Indeed, Rouhani has three decades of practice to draw from.
After the Islamic revolution of 1979, the new regime consolidated its power by taking cover behind a discourse revolving around the concept of foreign enemies. The new political elites appealed to a fiery religious rhetoric, declaring the two superpowers of the time, the U.S. and the Soviet Union, to be the Great Satan and the Lesser Satan , respectively, and thus propagandizing that these two countries were against both Islam and Iran s national interests.
The raid on the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and the abduction of its staff, together with the merging of anti-imperialist and revolutionary rhetoric with the notion of challenging oppression identified in Shiism with Imam Hussein, aroused tremendous excitement especially among the youth.
In spite of the enormous human losses, the war Iraq declared on Iran right after the Islamic revolution was what kept the regime alive. Thanks to this war, the mullahs were able to purge the liberals and communists who had previously played an important role in overthrowing the Shah. Moreover, the mullahs also weathered the public reaction sparked by the revolution which probably would have targeted the revolutionary elite at first and channeled such public sentiment toward Iraq.
In short, a rhetoric laying emphasis on the hostile environment surrounding the country was necessary for the new regime to survive and take root. Such rhetoric allowed the regime to stay afloat in the first decade following the revolution.
 Patronizing the Islamic world
The regime s second foreign policy move was based on the active use of religion in matters concerning foreign policy.
The most salient example of this foreign policy push was the fatwa issued by Ayatollah Khomeini ordering Muslims to murder Salman Rushdie, the Indian author of the book titled Satanic Verses . Rushdie is still alive, but Hitoshi Igarashi who translated the book into Japanese was murdered, the Italian translator Ettore Capriolo was stabbed in his house and Norwegian publisher William Nygard was the victim of an armed assault in front of his house.
Iran, by grabbing the leadership in such a conflict and ideologically inflaming it, was acting as if it had discovered the way to lead the oppressed Islamic world.
However, the path to the leadership of the Islamic world was not an easy one. It entailed a process that continuously pit Iran against Saudi Arabia. Even though Iran s emphasis on Shiism raised a question mark in the minds of Sunni Muslims, Iran s discourse claiming that it represented the whole of the Islamic world did not fail to elicit excitement on the part of the average Muslim. In order to consolidate an overall perception that Iran was the defender of the Islamic world two major attitudes were adopted and continuously underlined by Tehran s foreign policy line: close attention to the dispute over Palestine, and defying Israel and the West through an anti-imperialist discourse.
The excitement that these discourses awoke to the extent that its rhetoric sharpened raised Iran s popularity. An important indicator of this situation is Iran s influence over non-state actors throughout the Middle East. Just as there are Shiite groups whose policies are directly determined by Iran in Lebanon, Iraq, and Yemen, there are various groups which distinctly bear Iranian influence and share Iran s exact same discourse within Sunni countries as well. Enmity toward Israel and revolutionary religious rhetoric has won Iran local supporters even in countries where religious traditions are systematically established.
We see that Iran also improved its ties with Russia and China during the same period. In a sense, the discourse around the Lesser Satan which was dominant in the early years of the revolution was swept aside. Instead, a process of rapprochement was initiated with Russia and China based on anti-Westernism.
A rising China and a Russia humiliated by its loss of the Cold War welcomed rapprochement with an anti-Western Iran. Doubtless, such a convergence had its realpolitik reasons. Particularly, growing China s increasing energy needs required cooperation with Iran. On the other hand, Iran needed technology from China, especially for its defense industry. Another concrete reason behind such a convergence of interests and foreign policies was Iran s dependence on Russia and China in acquiring nuclear technology.
The 2000s brought Iran to the edge of a cliff in its foreign relations due to its anti-Westernism and extreme anti-imperialist (even wipe Israel from the map ) discourse. This whole framework began to transform rapidly with the Arab Spring. As the Arab Spring to which most analysts have struggled to give meaning and most countries have been confounded as to how to respond turned into a storm, Iran was indeed expected to be hit the hardest. For the Arab Spring emerged with the expectation that it would lead Arab populations to democratic progress, and, ultimately, to the formation of Arab democracies compatible with the requirements of the global order.
However, the spring ignited in Tunisia was short lived. The experiment in Egypt ended with a military coup; the regime in Syria which was assumed would dissolve remained intact in a manner that did not embarrass its foremost supporter, Iran. The winds began blowing the opposite way.
 Opening to the West
It is a fact that wherever state authority diminishes the emerging gap is immediately filled by other actors. Until now, whenever state authority retreated in the Middle East either clan leaders or religious sheikhs used to fill the emerging gap. However today, any instance of a power vacuum is taken advantage of by an influx of terrorist groups. The fact that the Syrian resistance movement was gradually overshadowed by terrorist organizations clearly demonstrates this new trend.
The growing strength of such groups deeply concerns the Western world. Now the major enemy and rising threat confronting the Western World is terrorists once again. For Iran, the magic formula to influence the West was finally obtained.
Policy-makers and intellectuals in Iran, a country which was once accused by the West of supporting terrorism, began to emphasize not anti-imperialism and anti-Westernism, but themes like combating radicalism, extremism, and terrorism. Such extremists emerged out of Sunni Muslim populations after all. So far, the sudden, pragmatic, realpolitik maneuver by Iran and the Shiite tradition seems to have been handled flawlessly.
Flashing smiles all around in Davos and trying to impress Western observers with a soft tone, Rouhani and his inner circle identify Salafist terrorists as the foremost threat and their major target. Time will tell how convincing such a policy line will be in Iran s attempt to win the heart of the West.
However, this is the fact we know now: Iranian diplomacy and foreign policy is one of precise calculations, one rationally apportioned between Iran s aims and its opportunities. From the sharpness of his speeches to the intensity of his facial expressions, it is clear that Ahmadinejad was addressing a Middle Eastern audience as the leader of an era when antagonism toward the West was popular. On the other hand, Rouhani has departed from his predecessor s policies and identified cooperation with the West as his main target. We can say that he has been successful in carrying out the requirements of this strategy.
